Data Visualization Project URL: https://public.flourish.studio/story/1771985/

Introduction
My final project explores the growth of single-family home developments in Chicago and how it has impacted property values. I also attempt to understand if these home developments displace long-term community members throughout the varying neighborhoods.

Methodology
I created my data visualizations by connecting to the Cook County Assessor's Data Portal through an API key. From there, I was able to download three data sets using a query codebase on R. I began by analyzing the property assessment dataset which included more than 20 million records. This data set is a record of every property assessment in Cook County from 2010-2020. I filtered the results so that the assessments are only for the years 2010 and 2020, the class code is for residential-type properties only, and the townships are within Chicago’s boundaries. After I filtered and cleaned the data, I grouped the data by neighborhood number and township name. The Cook County Assessor’s office utilizes an internal geographic boundary system that is unique to them. Once I grouped the data, I then calculated the sum of the final assessment amount for each township and neighborhood combo. I took this amount and divided it by 10% so I get the fair market value for each neighborhood. I merged the values from 2010 and 2020 and computed the percent difference. I then subtracted the percent difference from the national average which is equal to 3.65% every year (36.5% over ten years). For example, if one neighborhood had a 70% increase in property values over the ten years, I subtract 36.5% from 70% and now the percent change for that property value is 33.5%. I did this to correct for the natural growth of property values in the U.S. That way, the 33.5% is purely a Chicago-driven market outcome. I merge this data set with the geo_codes data from the Assessor’s office which provides me the geographic points for each neighborhood and township combo. I then merge this data set to another Chicago data frame that tracks all the city-owned single-family lots and homes available.

The second data frame and the third data frame also come from the property assessments data set. However, this time I queried different columns so I can get results for each property owner that filed a tax appeal with the agency. I also group the data by the neighborhood and township variables and then count the number of cases where an appeal was filed. I divide this number by the total number of assessments in each neighborhood and township combo. This gives me the tax appeal rate for each neighborhood. I also merge this data with the geocode data frame. The third data set resembles the second data set but I take an additional step and extract the number of cases where appeals were filed and approved, and divide that by the total number of cases where appeals were just filed. This data set also got merged with the geocodes data frame.

After I downloaded all three of the data sets, I tried to create my maps using the 3d projector tool on Flourish. However, after many error messages and countless hours of issue diagnosis, I realized that the geometry column that I merged onto my data sets from the geocodes data frame was recorded incorrectly by the Assessor’s office directly. So I spent several hours trying to find a way to convert or fix this column and was finally able to do so when I came across a geoJSON converter online.
After my data sets were ready, I mainly used Flourish to map out my data using a 3d projection. The projection tool allowed me to incorporate a thematic color scheme, and the 2nd layer of points onto my map while providing me with ways to utilize height and dimension to represent my findings. It is also interactive because it allows users to hover over and choose which data point to read more about or analyze further.

Findings
My research question examines the increase in single-family home development and how it has impacted property values in Chicago, and whether or not long-term residents are being displaced from their neighborhoods due to this phenomenon.

Based on my visuals, it seems that the impact of single-family home developments does not impact every community the same way. There is a consensus among policymakers that new single-family homes increase the fair market value of surrounding residential properties - thus pushing out folks who can not afford the higher property tax payment. However, the maps that I created tell a different story. First, for 10 years, most of the communities in Chicago saw a negative percent change in home values when we compare them to the national average. Further, only the communities that border Lake Michigan saw a significant increase in their property values. This tells us that the housing market (even for single-family units) that are outside the city center has less consumer demand than properties that are on the lakefront. Graph one shows the surplus of city-owned single-family lots that are waiting to be purchased by investors. Yet - most of these properties are located just outside the city center and are not receiving any offers.

Additionally, graphs two and three show that the lakefront is most active and participative when it pertains to property tax appeals. This is a sign that the housing market in that area is highly competitive and is driving the sale price of the properties much higher - thus causing fair market values to soar. In contrast, we saw many Southwest and Far West neighborhoods lose more than 80% of their property values for 10 years. These neighborhoods also experienced higher rates of tax appeal approvals which consequently lowered the tax base for that community's public schools, libraries, and local services.

The maps show us that Chicago is experiencing a cycle where low-valued communities are continuously losing property tax payments due to a loss of property values and increased appeal tax approvals. The lower tax base will hurt the community even more as they lose out on funding for public goods. Perhaps this is one of the primary reasons that families and residents are leaving their neighborhoods - if the case is not purely gentrification.